.. label follows

.. _sec:modifylinebreaks:

The -m (modifylinebreaks) switch
================================

All features described in this section will only be relevant if the ``-m`` switch is used.

.. describe:: modifylinebreaks:fields

.. literalinclude:: ../defaultSettings.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``modifyLineBreaks`` 
 	:name: lst:modifylinebreaks
 	:lines: 472-474
 	:linenos:
 	:lineno-start: 472

As of Version 3.0, ``latexindent.pl`` has the ``-m`` switch, which permits ``latexindent.pl`` to
modify line breaks, according to the specifications in the ``modifyLineBreaks`` field. *The settings
in this field will only be considered if the ``-m`` switch has been used*. A snippet of the default
settings of this field is shown in :numref:`lst:modifylinebreaks`.

Having read the previous paragraph, it should sound reasonable that, if you call ``latexindent.pl``
using the ``-m`` switch, then you give it permission to modify line breaks in your file, but let’s
be clear:

.. index:: warning;the m switch

.. warning::	
	
	If you call ``latexindent.pl`` with the ``-m`` switch, then you are giving it permission to modify
	line breaks. By default, the only thing that will happen is that multiple blank lines will be
	condensed into one blank line; many other settings are possible, discussed next.
	 

.. describe:: preserveBlankLines:0\|1

This field is directly related to *poly-switches*, discussed below. By default, it is set to ``1``,
which means that blank lines will be protected from removal; however, regardless of this setting,
multiple blank lines can be condensed if ``condenseMultipleBlankLinesInto`` is greater than ``0``,
discussed next.

.. describe:: condenseMultipleBlankLinesInto:positive integer

Assuming that this switch takes an integer value greater than ``0``, ``latexindent.pl`` will
condense multiple blank lines into the number of blank lines illustrated by this switch. As an
example, :numref:`lst:mlb-bl` shows a sample file with blank lines; upon running

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl myfile.tex -m  

the output is shown in :numref:`lst:mlb-bl-out`; note that the multiple blank lines have been
condensed into one blank line, and note also that we have used the ``-m`` switch!

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/mlb1.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``mlb1.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:mlb-bl

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/mlb1-out.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``mlb1.tex`` out output 
 	:name: lst:mlb-bl-out

.. label follows

.. _subsec:textwrapping:

textWrapOptions: modifying line breaks by text wrapping
-------------------------------------------------------

When the ``-m`` switch is active ``latexindent.pl`` has the ability to wrap text using the options
specified in the ``textWrapOptions`` field, see :numref:`lst:textWrapOptions`. The value of
``columns`` specifies the column at which the text should be wrapped. By default, the value of
``columns`` is ``0``, so ``latexindent.pl`` will *not* wrap text; if you change it to a value of
``2`` or more, then text will be wrapped after the character in the specified column.

.. index:: modifying linebreaks; by text wrapping, globally

.. literalinclude:: ../defaultSettings.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``textWrapOptions`` 
 	:name: lst:textWrapOptions
 	:lines: 499-500
 	:linenos:
 	:lineno-start: 499

For example, consider the file give in :numref:`lst:textwrap1`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap1.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``textwrap1.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap1

Using the file ``textwrap1.yaml`` in :numref:`lst:textwrap1-yaml`, and running the command

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. index:: switches;-o demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m textwrap1.tex -o textwrap1-mod1.tex -l textwrap1.yaml

we obtain the output in :numref:`lst:textwrap1-mod1`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap1-mod1.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``textwrap1-mod1.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap1-mod1

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap1.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``textwrap1.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap1-yaml

The text wrapping routine is performed *after* verbatim environments

.. index:: verbatim;in relation to textWrapOptions

have been stored, so verbatim environments and verbatim commands are exempt from the routine. For
example, using the file in :numref:`lst:textwrap2`,

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap2.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``textwrap2.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap2

and running the following command and continuing to use ``textwrap1.yaml`` from
:numref:`lst:textwrap1-yaml`,

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. index:: switches;-o demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m textwrap2.tex -o textwrap2-mod1.tex -l textwrap1.yaml

then the output is as in :numref:`lst:textwrap2-mod1`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap2-mod1.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``textwrap2-mod1.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap2-mod1

Furthermore, the text wrapping routine is performed after the trailing comments have been stored,
and they are also exempt from text wrapping. For example, using the file in
:numref:`lst:textwrap3`

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap3.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``textwrap3.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap3

and running the following command and continuing to use ``textwrap1.yaml`` from
:numref:`lst:textwrap1-yaml`,

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. index:: switches;-o demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m textwrap3.tex -o textwrap3-mod1.tex -l textwrap1.yaml

then the output is as in :numref:`lst:textwrap3-mod1`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap3-mod1.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``textwrap3-mod1.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap3-mod1

The text wrapping routine of ``latexindent.pl`` is performed by the ``Text::Wrap`` module, which
provides a ``separator`` feature to separate lines with characters other than a new line (see
(“Text::Wrap Perl Module” 2017)). By default, the separator is empty which means that a new line
token will be used, but you can change it as you see fit.

For example starting with the file in :numref:`lst:textwrap4`

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap4.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``textwrap4.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap4

and using ``textwrap2.yaml`` from :numref:`lst:textwrap2-yaml` with the following command

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. index:: switches;-o demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m textwrap4.tex -o textwrap4-mod2.tex -l textwrap2.yaml

then we obtain the output in :numref:`lst:textwrap4-mod2`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap4-mod2.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``textwrap4-mod2.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap4-mod2

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap2.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``textwrap2.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap2-yaml

There are options to specify the ``huge`` option for the ``Text::Wrap`` module (“Text::Wrap Perl
Module” 2017) . This can be helpful if you would like to forbid the ``Text::Wrap`` routine from
breaking words. For example, using the settings in :numref:`lst:textwrap2A-yaml` and
:numref:`lst:textwrap2B-yaml` and running the commands

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. index:: switches;-o demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m textwrap4.tex -o=+-mod2A -l textwrap2A.yaml
    latexindent.pl -m textwrap4.tex -o=+-mod2B -l textwrap2B.yaml

gives the respective output in :numref:`lst:textwrap4-mod2A` and :numref:`lst:textwrap4-mod2B`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap4-mod2A.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``textwrap4-mod2A.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap4-mod2A

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap2A.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``textwrap2A.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap2A-yaml

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap4-mod2B.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``textwrap4-mod2B.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap4-mod2B

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap2B.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``textwrap2B.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap2B-yaml

You can also specify the ``tabstop`` field as an integer value, which is passed to the text wrap
module; see (“Text::Wrap Perl Module” 2017) for details. Starting with the code in
:numref:`lst:textwrap-ts` with settings in :numref:`lst:tabstop`, and running the command

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. index:: switches;-o demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m textwrap-ts.tex -o=+-mod1 -l tabstop.yaml

gives the code given in :numref:`lst:textwrap-ts-mod1`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap-ts.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``textwrap-ts.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap-ts

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/tabstop.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``tabstop.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:tabstop

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap-ts-mod1.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``textwrap-ts-mod1.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap-ts-mod1

You can specify ``break`` and ``unexpand`` options in your settings in analogous ways to those
demonstrated in :numref:`lst:textwrap2B-yaml` and :numref:`lst:tabstop`, and they will be passed
to the ``Text::Wrap`` module. I have not found a useful reason to do this; see (“Text::Wrap Perl
Module” 2017) for more details.

text wrapping on a per-code-block basis
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

By default, if the value of ``columns`` is greater than 0 and the ``-m`` switch is active, then the
text wrapping routine will operate before the code blocks have been searched for. This behaviour is
customisable; in particular, you can instead instruct ``latexindent.pl`` to apply ``textWrap`` on a
per-code-block basis. Thanks to ((zoehneto) 2018) for their help in testing and shaping this
feature.

.. index:: modifying linebreaks; by text wrapping, per-code-block

The full details of ``textWrapOptions`` are shown in :numref:`lst:textWrapOptionsAll`. In
particular, note the field ``perCodeBlockBasis: 0``.

.. index:: specialBeginEnd;textWrapOptions

.. literalinclude:: ../defaultSettings.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``textWrapOptions`` 
 	:name: lst:textWrapOptionsAll
 	:lines: 499-515
 	:linenos:
 	:lineno-start: 499

The code blocks detailed in :numref:`lst:textWrapOptionsAll` are with direct reference to those
detailed in :numref:`tab:code-blocks`. The only special case is the ``masterDocument`` field; this
is designed for ‘chapter’-type files that may contain paragraphs that are not within any other
code-blocks. The same notation is used between this feature and the ``removeParagraphLineBreaks``
described in :numref:`lst:removeParagraphLineBreaks`; in fact, the two features can even be
combined (this is detailed in :numref:`subsec:removeparagraphlinebreaks:and:textwrap`).

Let’s explore these switches with reference to the code given in :numref:`lst:textwrap5`; the text
outside of the environment is considered part of the ``masterDocument``.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap5.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``textwrap5.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap5

With reference to this code block, the settings given in :numref:`lst:textwrap3-yaml` and
:numref:`lst:textwrap4-yaml` and :numref:`lst:textwrap5-yaml` each give the same output.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap3.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``textwrap3.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap3-yaml

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap4.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``textwrap4.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap4-yaml

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap5.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``textwrap5.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap5-yaml

Let’s explore the similarities and differences in the equivalent (with respect to
:numref:`lst:textwrap5`) syntax specified in :numref:`lst:textwrap3-yaml` and
:numref:`lst:textwrap4-yaml` and :numref:`lst:textwrap5-yaml`:

-  in each of :numref:`lst:textwrap3-yaml` and :numref:`lst:textwrap4-yaml` and
   :numref:`lst:textwrap5-yaml` notice that ``columns: 30``;

-  in each of :numref:`lst:textwrap3-yaml` and :numref:`lst:textwrap4-yaml` and
   :numref:`lst:textwrap5-yaml` notice that ``perCodeBlockBasis: 1``;

-  in :numref:`lst:textwrap3-yaml` we have specified ``all: 1`` so that the text wrapping will
   operate upon *all* code blocks;

-  in :numref:`lst:textwrap4-yaml` we have *not* specified ``all``, and instead, have specified
   that text wrapping should be applied to each of ``environments`` and ``masterDocument``;

-  in :numref:`lst:textwrap5-yaml` we have specified text wrapping for ``masterDocument`` and on a
   *per-name* basis for ``environments`` code blocks.

Upon running the following commands

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -s textwrap5.tex -l=textwrap3.yaml -m
    latexindent.pl -s textwrap5.tex -l=textwrap4.yaml -m
    latexindent.pl -s textwrap5.tex -l=textwrap5.yaml -m

we obtain the output shown in :numref:`lst:textwrap5-mod3`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap5-mod3.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``textwrap5-mod3.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap5-mod3

We can explore the idea of per-name text wrapping given in :numref:`lst:textwrap5-yaml` by using
:numref:`lst:textwrap6`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap6.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``textwrap6.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap6

In particular, upon running

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -s textwrap6.tex -l=textwrap5.yaml -m

we obtain the output given in :numref:`lst:textwrap6-mod5`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap6-mod5.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``textwrap6.tex`` using :numref:`lst:textwrap5-yaml` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap6-mod5

Notice that, because ``environments`` has been specified only for ``myenv`` (in
:numref:`lst:textwrap5-yaml`) that the environment named ``another`` has *not* had text wrapping
applied to it.

The all field can be specified with exceptions which can either be done on a per-code-block or
per-name basis; we explore this in relation to :numref:`lst:textwrap6` in the settings given in
:numref:`lst:textwrap6-yaml` – :numref:`lst:textwrap8-yaml`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap6.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``textwrap6.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap6-yaml

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap7.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``textwrap7.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap7-yaml

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap8.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``textwrap8.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap8-yaml

Upon running the commands

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -s textwrap6.tex -l=textwrap6.yaml -m
    latexindent.pl -s textwrap6.tex -l=textwrap7.yaml -m
    latexindent.pl -s textwrap6.tex -l=textwrap8.yaml -m

we receive the respective output given in :numref:`lst:textwrap6-mod6` –
:numref:`lst:textwrap6-mod8`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap6-mod6.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``textwrap6.tex`` using :numref:`lst:textwrap6-yaml` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap6-mod6

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap6-mod7.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``textwrap6.tex`` using :numref:`lst:textwrap7-yaml` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap6-mod7

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap6-mod8.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``textwrap6.tex`` using :numref:`lst:textwrap8-yaml` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap6-mod8

Notice that:

-  in :numref:`lst:textwrap6-mod6` the text wrapping routine has not been applied to any
   ``environments`` because it has been switched off (per-code-block) in
   :numref:`lst:textwrap6-yaml`;

-  in :numref:`lst:textwrap6-mod7` the text wrapping routine has not been applied to ``myenv``
   because it has been switched off (per-name) in :numref:`lst:textwrap7-yaml`;

-  in :numref:`lst:textwrap6-mod8` the text wrapping routine has not been applied to
   ``masterDocument`` because of the settings in :numref:`lst:textwrap8-yaml`.

The ``columns`` field has a variety of different ways that it can be specified; we’ve seen two basic
ways already: the default (set to ``0``) and a positive integer (see :numref:`lst:textwrap6`, for
example). We explore further options in :numref:`lst:textwrap9-yaml` –
:numref:`lst:textwrap11-yaml`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap9.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``textwrap9.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap9-yaml

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap10.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``textwrap10.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap10-yaml

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap11.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``textwrap11.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap11-yaml

:numref:`lst:textwrap9-yaml` and :numref:`lst:textwrap10-yaml` are equivalent. Upon running the
commands

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -s textwrap6.tex -l=textwrap9.yaml -m
    latexindent.pl -s textwrap6.tex -l=textwrap11.yaml -m

we receive the respective output given in :numref:`lst:textwrap6-mod9` and
:numref:`lst:textwrap6-mod11`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap6-mod9.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``textwrap6.tex`` using :numref:`lst:textwrap9-yaml` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap6-mod9

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap6-mod11.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``textwrap6.tex`` using :numref:`lst:textwrap11-yaml` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap6-mod11

Notice that:

-  in :numref:`lst:textwrap6-mod9` the text for the ``masterDocument`` has been wrapped using
   ``30`` columns, while ``environments`` has been wrapped using ``50`` columns;

-  in :numref:`lst:textwrap6-mod11` the text for ``myenv`` has been wrapped using ``50`` columns,
   the text for ``another`` has been wrapped using ``15`` columns, and ``masterDocument`` has been
   wrapped using ``30`` columns.

If you don’t specify a ``default`` value on per-code-block basis, then the ``default`` value from
``columns`` will be inherited; if you don’t specify a default value for ``columns`` then ``80`` will
be used.

``alignAtAmpersandTakesPriority`` is set to ``1`` by default; assuming that text wrapping is
occurring on a per-code-block basis, and the current environment/code block is specified within
:numref:`lst:aligndelims:basic` then text wrapping will be disabled for this code block.

If you wish to specify ``afterHeading`` commands (see :numref:`lst:indentAfterHeadings`) on a
per-name basis, then you need to append the name with ``:heading``, for example, you might use
``section:heading``.

Summary of text wrapping
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is important to note the following:

.. index:: verbatim;within summary of text wrapping

-  Verbatim environments (:numref:`lst:verbatimEnvironments`) and verbatim commands
   (:numref:`lst:verbatimCommands`) will *not* be affected by the text wrapping routine (see
   :numref:`lst:textwrap2-mod1`);

-  comments will *not* be affected by the text wrapping routine (see
   :numref:`lst:textwrap3-mod1`);

-  it is possible to wrap text on a per-code-block and a per-name basis;

-  the text wrapping routine sets ``preserveBlankLines`` as ``1``;

-  indentation is performed *after* the text wrapping routine; as such, indented code will likely
   exceed any maximum value set in the ``columns`` field.

.. label follows

.. _sec:onesentenceperline:

oneSentencePerLine: modifying line breaks for sentences
-------------------------------------------------------

You can instruct ``latexindent.pl`` to format your file so that it puts one sentence per line. Thank
you to (mlep 2017) for helping to shape and test this feature. The behaviour of this part of the
script is controlled by the switches detailed in :numref:`lst:oneSentencePerLine`, all of which we
discuss next.

.. index:: modifying linebreaks; by using one sentence per line

.. index:: sentences;oneSentencePerLine

.. index:: sentences;one sentence per line

.. index:: regular expressions;lowercase alph a-z

.. index:: regular expressions;uppercase alph A-Z

.. literalinclude:: ../defaultSettings.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``oneSentencePerLine`` 
 	:name: lst:oneSentencePerLine
 	:lines: 475-498
 	:linenos:
 	:lineno-start: 475

.. describe:: manipulateSentences:0\|1

This is a binary switch that details if ``latexindent.pl`` should perform the sentence manipulation
routine; it is *off* (set to ``0``) by default, and you will need to turn it on (by setting it to
``1``) if you want the script to modify line breaks surrounding and within sentences.

.. describe:: removeSentenceLineBreaks:0\|1

When operating upon sentences ``latexindent.pl`` will, by default, remove internal line breaks as
``removeSentenceLineBreaks`` is set to ``1``. Setting this switch to ``0`` instructs
``latexindent.pl`` not to do so.

.. index:: sentences;removing sentence line breaks

For example, consider ``multiple-sentences.tex`` shown in :numref:`lst:multiple-sentences`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/multiple-sentences.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``multiple-sentences.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:multiple-sentences

If we use the YAML files in :numref:`lst:manipulate-sentences-yaml` and
:numref:`lst:keep-sen-line-breaks-yaml`, and run the commands

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl multiple-sentences -m -l=manipulate-sentences.yaml
    latexindent.pl multiple-sentences -m -l=keep-sen-line-breaks.yaml

then we obtain the respective output given in :numref:`lst:multiple-sentences-mod1` and
:numref:`lst:multiple-sentences-mod2`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/multiple-sentences-mod1.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``multiple-sentences.tex`` using :numref:`lst:manipulate-sentences-yaml` 
 	:name: lst:multiple-sentences-mod1

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/manipulate-sentences.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``manipulate-sentences.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:manipulate-sentences-yaml

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/multiple-sentences-mod2.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``multiple-sentences.tex`` using :numref:`lst:keep-sen-line-breaks-yaml` 
 	:name: lst:multiple-sentences-mod2

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/keep-sen-line-breaks.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``keep-sen-line-breaks.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:keep-sen-line-breaks-yaml

Notice, in particular, that the ‘internal’ sentence line breaks in
:numref:`lst:multiple-sentences` have been removed in :numref:`lst:multiple-sentences-mod1`, but
have not been removed in :numref:`lst:multiple-sentences-mod2`.

The remainder of the settings displayed in :numref:`lst:oneSentencePerLine` instruct
``latexindent.pl`` on how to define a sentence. From the perspective of ``latexindent.pl`` a
sentence must:

.. index:: sentences;follow

.. index:: sentences;begin with

.. index:: sentences;end with

-  *follow* a certain character or set of characters (see :numref:`lst:sentencesFollow`); by
   default, this is either ``\par``, a blank line, a full stop/period (.), exclamation mark (!),
   question mark (?) right brace (}) or a comment on the previous line;

-  *begin* with a character type (see :numref:`lst:sentencesBeginWith`); by default, this is only
   capital letters;

-  *end* with a character (see :numref:`lst:sentencesEndWith`); by default, these are full
   stop/period (.), exclamation mark (!) and question mark (?).

In each case, you can specify the ``other`` field to include any pattern that you would like; you
can specify anything in this field using the language of regular expressions.

.. index:: regular expressions;lowercase alph a-z

.. index:: regular expressions;uppercase alph A-Z

.. literalinclude:: ../defaultSettings.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``sentencesFollow`` 
 	:name: lst:sentencesFollow
 	:lines: 480-488
 	:linenos:
 	:lineno-start: 480

.. literalinclude:: ../defaultSettings.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``sentencesBeginWith`` 
 	:name: lst:sentencesBeginWith
 	:lines: 489-492
 	:linenos:
 	:lineno-start: 489

.. literalinclude:: ../defaultSettings.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``sentencesEndWith`` 
 	:name: lst:sentencesEndWith
 	:lines: 493-498
 	:linenos:
 	:lineno-start: 493

sentencesFollow
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Let’s explore a few of the switches in ``sentencesFollow``; let’s start with
:numref:`lst:multiple-sentences`, and use the YAML settings given in
:numref:`lst:sentences-follow1-yaml`. Using the command

.. index:: sentences;follow

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl multiple-sentences -m -l=sentences-follow1.yaml

we obtain the output given in :numref:`lst:multiple-sentences-mod3`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/multiple-sentences-mod3.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``multiple-sentences.tex`` using :numref:`lst:sentences-follow1-yaml` 
 	:name: lst:multiple-sentences-mod3

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/sentences-follow1.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``sentences-follow1.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:sentences-follow1-yaml

Notice that, because ``blankLine`` is set to ``0``, ``latexindent.pl`` will not seek sentences
following a blank line, and so the fourth sentence has not been accounted for.

We can explore the ``other`` field in :numref:`lst:sentencesFollow` with the ``.tex`` file
detailed in :numref:`lst:multiple-sentences1`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/multiple-sentences1.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``multiple-sentences1.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:multiple-sentences1

Upon running the following commands

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl multiple-sentences1 -m -l=manipulate-sentences.yaml
    latexindent.pl multiple-sentences1 -m -l=manipulate-sentences.yaml,sentences-follow2.yaml

then we obtain the respective output given in :numref:`lst:multiple-sentences1-mod1` and
:numref:`lst:multiple-sentences1-mod2`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/multiple-sentences1-mod1.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``multiple-sentences1.tex`` using :numref:`lst:manipulate-sentences-yaml` 
 	:name: lst:multiple-sentences1-mod1

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/multiple-sentences1-mod2.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``multiple-sentences1.tex`` using :numref:`lst:sentences-follow2-yaml` 
 	:name: lst:multiple-sentences1-mod2

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/sentences-follow2.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``sentences-follow2.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:sentences-follow2-yaml

Notice that in :numref:`lst:multiple-sentences1-mod1` the first sentence after the ``)`` has not
been accounted for, but that following the inclusion of :numref:`lst:sentences-follow2-yaml`, the
output given in :numref:`lst:multiple-sentences1-mod2` demonstrates that the sentence *has* been
accounted for correctly.

sentencesBeginWith
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

By default, ``latexindent.pl`` will only assume that sentences begin with the upper case letters
``A-Z``; you can instruct the script to define sentences to begin with lower case letters (see
:numref:`lst:sentencesBeginWith`), and we can use the ``other`` field to define sentences to begin
with other characters.

.. index:: sentences;begin with

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/multiple-sentences2.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``multiple-sentences2.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:multiple-sentences2

Upon running the following commands

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl multiple-sentences2 -m -l=manipulate-sentences.yaml
    latexindent.pl multiple-sentences2 -m -l=manipulate-sentences.yaml,sentences-begin1.yaml

then we obtain the respective output given in :numref:`lst:multiple-sentences2-mod1` and
:numref:`lst:multiple-sentences2-mod2`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/multiple-sentences2-mod1.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``multiple-sentences2.tex`` using :numref:`lst:manipulate-sentences-yaml` 
 	:name: lst:multiple-sentences2-mod1

.. index:: regular expressions;numeric 0-9

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/multiple-sentences2-mod2.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``multiple-sentences2.tex`` using :numref:`lst:sentences-begin1-yaml` 
 	:name: lst:multiple-sentences2-mod2

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/sentences-begin1.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``sentences-begin1.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:sentences-begin1-yaml

Notice that in :numref:`lst:multiple-sentences2-mod1`, the first sentence has been accounted for
but that the subsequent sentences have not. In :numref:`lst:multiple-sentences2-mod2`, all of the
sentences have been accounted for, because the ``other`` field in
:numref:`lst:sentences-begin1-yaml` has defined sentences to begin with either ``$`` or any
numeric digit, ``0`` to ``9``.

sentencesEndWith
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Let’s return to :numref:`lst:multiple-sentences`; we have already seen the default way in which
``latexindent.pl`` will operate on the sentences in this file in
:numref:`lst:multiple-sentences-mod1`. We can populate the ``other`` field with any character that
we wish; for example, using the YAML specified in :numref:`lst:sentences-end1-yaml` and the
command

.. index:: sentences;end with

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl multiple-sentences -m -l=sentences-end1.yaml
    latexindent.pl multiple-sentences -m -l=sentences-end2.yaml

then we obtain the output in :numref:`lst:multiple-sentences-mod4`.

.. index:: regular expressions;lowercase alph a-z

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/multiple-sentences-mod4.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``multiple-sentences.tex`` using :numref:`lst:sentences-end1-yaml` 
 	:name: lst:multiple-sentences-mod4

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/sentences-end1.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``sentences-end1.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:sentences-end1-yaml

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/multiple-sentences-mod5.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``multiple-sentences.tex`` using :numref:`lst:sentences-end2-yaml` 
 	:name: lst:multiple-sentences-mod5

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/sentences-end2.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``sentences-end2.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:sentences-end2-yaml

There is a subtle difference between the output in :numref:`lst:multiple-sentences-mod4` and
:numref:`lst:multiple-sentences-mod5`; in particular, in :numref:`lst:multiple-sentences-mod4`
the word ``sentence`` has not been defined as a sentence, because we have not instructed
``latexindent.pl`` to begin sentences with lower case letters. We have changed this by using the
settings in :numref:`lst:sentences-end2-yaml`, and the associated output in
:numref:`lst:multiple-sentences-mod5` reflects this.

Referencing :numref:`lst:sentencesEndWith`, you’ll notice that there is a field called
``basicFullStop``, which is set to ``0``, and that the ``betterFullStop`` is set to ``1`` by
default.

Let’s consider the file shown in :numref:`lst:url`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/url.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``url.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:url

Upon running the following commands

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl url -m -l=manipulate-sentences.yaml

we obtain the output given in :numref:`lst:url-mod1`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/url-mod1.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``url.tex`` using :numref:`lst:manipulate-sentences-yaml` 
 	:name: lst:url-mod1

Notice that the full stop within the url has been interpreted correctly. This is because, within the
``betterFullStop``, full stops at the end of sentences have the following properties:

-  they are ignored within ``e.g.`` and ``i.e.``;

-  they can not be immediately followed by a lower case or upper case letter;

-  they can not be immediately followed by a hyphen, comma, or number.

If you find that the ``betterFullStop`` does not work for your purposes, then you can switch it off
by setting it to ``0``, and you can experiment with the ``other`` field. You can also seek to
customise the ``betterFullStop`` routine by using the *fine tuning*, detailed in
:numref:`lst:fineTuning`.

The ``basicFullStop`` routine should probably be avoided in most situations, as it does not
accommodate the specifications above. For example, using the following command

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl url -m -l=alt-full-stop1.yaml

and the YAML in :numref:`lst:alt-full-stop1-yaml` gives the output in :numref:`lst:url-mod2`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/url-mod2.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``url.tex`` using :numref:`lst:alt-full-stop1-yaml` 
 	:name: lst:url-mod2

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/alt-full-stop1.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``alt-full-stop1.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:alt-full-stop1-yaml

Notice that the full stop within the URL has not been accommodated correctly because of the
non-default settings in :numref:`lst:alt-full-stop1-yaml`.

Features of the oneSentencePerLine routine
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The sentence manipulation routine takes place *after* verbatim

.. index:: verbatim;in relation to oneSentencePerLine

environments, preamble and trailing comments have been accounted for; this means that any characters
within these types of code blocks will not be part of the sentence manipulation routine.

For example, if we begin with the ``.tex`` file in :numref:`lst:multiple-sentences3`, and run the
command

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl multiple-sentences3 -m -l=manipulate-sentences.yaml

then we obtain the output in :numref:`lst:multiple-sentences3-mod1`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/multiple-sentences3.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``multiple-sentences3.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:multiple-sentences3

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/multiple-sentences3-mod1.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``multiple-sentences3.tex`` using :numref:`lst:manipulate-sentences-yaml` 
 	:name: lst:multiple-sentences3-mod1

Furthermore, if sentences run across environments then, by default, the line breaks internal to the
sentence will be removed. For example, if we use the ``.tex`` file in
:numref:`lst:multiple-sentences4` and run the commands

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl multiple-sentences4 -m -l=manipulate-sentences.yaml
    latexindent.pl multiple-sentences4 -m -l=keep-sen-line-breaks.yaml

then we obtain the output in :numref:`lst:multiple-sentences4-mod1` and
:numref:`lst:multiple-sentences4-mod2`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/multiple-sentences4.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``multiple-sentences4.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:multiple-sentences4

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/multiple-sentences4-mod1.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``multiple-sentences4.tex`` using :numref:`lst:manipulate-sentences-yaml` 
 	:name: lst:multiple-sentences4-mod1

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/multiple-sentences4-mod2.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``multiple-sentences4.tex`` using :numref:`lst:keep-sen-line-breaks-yaml` 
 	:name: lst:multiple-sentences4-mod2

Once you’ve read :numref:`sec:poly-switches`, you will know that you can accommodate the removal
of internal sentence line breaks by using the YAML in :numref:`lst:item-rules2-yaml` and the
command

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl multiple-sentences4 -m -l=item-rules2.yaml

the output of which is shown in :numref:`lst:multiple-sentences4-mod3`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/multiple-sentences4-mod3.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``multiple-sentences4.tex`` using :numref:`lst:item-rules2-yaml` 
 	:name: lst:multiple-sentences4-mod3

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/item-rules2.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``item-rules2.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:item-rules2-yaml

text wrapping and indenting sentences
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``oneSentencePerLine`` can be instructed to perform text wrapping and indentation upon
sentences.

.. index:: sentences;text wrapping

.. index:: sentences;indenting

Let’s use the code in :numref:`lst:multiple-sentences5`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/multiple-sentences5.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``multiple-sentences5.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:multiple-sentences5

Referencing :numref:`lst:sentence-wrap1-yaml`, and running the following command

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl multiple-sentences5 -m -l=sentence-wrap1.yaml

we receive the output given in :numref:`lst:multiple-sentences5-mod1`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/multiple-sentences5-mod1.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``multiple-sentences5.tex`` using :numref:`lst:sentence-wrap1-yaml` 
 	:name: lst:multiple-sentences5-mod1

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/sentence-wrap1.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``sentence-wrap1.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:sentence-wrap1-yaml

If you wish to specify the ``columns`` field on a per-code-block basis for sentences, then you would
use ``sentence``; explicitly, starting with :numref:`lst:textwrap9-yaml`, for example, you would
replace/append ``environments`` with, for example, ``sentence: 50``.

If you specify ``textWrapSentences`` as 1, but do *not* specify a value for ``columns`` then the
text wrapping will *not* operate on sentences, and you will see a warning in ``indent.log``.

The indentation of sentences requires that sentences are stored as code blocks. This means that you
may need to tweak :numref:`lst:sentencesEndWith`. Let’s explore this in relation to
:numref:`lst:multiple-sentences6`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/multiple-sentences6.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``multiple-sentences6.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:multiple-sentences6

By default, ``latexindent.pl`` will find the full-stop within the first ``item``, which means that,
upon running the following commands

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. index:: switches;-y demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl multiple-sentences6 -m -l=sentence-wrap1.yaml 
    latexindent.pl multiple-sentences6 -m -l=sentence-wrap1.yaml -y="modifyLineBreaks:oneSentencePerLine:sentenceIndent:''"

we receive the respective output in :numref:`lst:multiple-sentences6-mod1` and
:numref:`lst:multiple-sentences6-mod2`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/multiple-sentences6-mod1.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``multiple-sentences6-mod1.tex`` using :numref:`lst:sentence-wrap1-yaml` 
 	:name: lst:multiple-sentences6-mod1

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/multiple-sentences6-mod2.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``multiple-sentences6-mod2.tex`` using :numref:`lst:sentence-wrap1-yaml` and no sentence indentation 
 	:name: lst:multiple-sentences6-mod2

We note that :numref:`lst:multiple-sentences6-mod1` the ``itemize`` code block has *not* been
indented appropriately. This is because the oneSentencePerLine has been instructed to store
sentences (because :numref:`lst:sentence-wrap1-yaml`); each sentence is then searched for code
blocks.

We can tweak the settings in :numref:`lst:sentencesEndWith` to ensure that full stops are not
followed by ``item`` commands, and that the end of sentences contains ``\end{itemize}`` as in
:numref:`lst:itemize-yaml` (if you intend to use this, ensure that you remove the line breaks from
the ``other`` field).

.. index:: regular expressions;lowercase alph a-z

.. index:: regular expressions;uppercase alph A-Z

.. index:: regular expressions;numeric 0-9

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/itemized.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``itemize.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:itemize-yaml

Upon running

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl multiple-sentences6 -m -l=sentence-wrap1.yaml,itemize.yaml

we receive the output in :numref:`lst:multiple-sentences6-mod3`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/multiple-sentences6-mod3.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``multiple-sentences6-mod3.tex`` using :numref:`lst:sentence-wrap1-yaml` and :numref:`lst:itemize-yaml` 
 	:name: lst:multiple-sentences6-mod3

Notice that the sentence has received indentation, and that the ``itemize`` code block has been
found and indented correctly.

.. label follows

.. _subsec:removeparagraphlinebreaks:

removeParagraphLineBreaks: modifying line breaks for paragraphs
---------------------------------------------------------------

When the ``-m`` switch is active ``latexindent.pl`` has the ability to remove line breaks from
within paragraphs; the behaviour is controlled by the ``removeParagraphLineBreaks`` field, detailed
in :numref:`lst:removeParagraphLineBreaks`. Thank you to (Owens 2017) for shaping and assisting
with the testing of this feature. .. describe:: removeParagraphLineBreaks:fields

This feature is considered complimentary to the ``oneSentencePerLine`` feature described in
:numref:`sec:onesentenceperline`.

.. index:: specialBeginEnd;removeParagraphLineBreaks

.. literalinclude:: ../defaultSettings.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``removeParagraphLineBreaks`` 
 	:name: lst:removeParagraphLineBreaks
 	:lines: 516-530
 	:linenos:
 	:lineno-start: 516

This routine can be turned on *globally* for *every* code block type known to ``latexindent.pl``
(see :numref:`tab:code-blocks`) by using the ``all`` switch; by default, this switch is *off*.
Assuming that the ``all`` switch is off, then the routine can be controlled on a per-code-block-type
basis, and within that, on a per-name basis. We will consider examples of each of these in turn, but
before we do, let’s specify what ``latexindent.pl`` considers as a paragraph:

-  it must begin on its own line with either an alphabetic or numeric character, and not with any of
   the code-block types detailed in :numref:`tab:code-blocks`;

-  it can include line breaks, but finishes when it meets either a blank line, a ``\par`` command,
   or any of the user-specified settings in the ``paragraphsStopAt`` field, detailed in
   :numref:`lst:paragraphsStopAt`.

Let’s start with the ``.tex`` file in :numref:`lst:shortlines`, together with the YAML settings in
:numref:`lst:remove-para1-yaml`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/shortlines.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``shortlines.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:shortlines

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/remove-para1.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``remove-para1.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:remove-para1-yaml

Upon running the command

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. index:: switches;-o demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m shortlines.tex -o shortlines1.tex -l remove-para1.yaml

then we obtain the output given in :numref:`lst:shortlines1`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/shortlines1.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``shortlines1.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:shortlines1

Keen readers may notice that some trailing white space must be present in the file in
:numref:`lst:shortlines` which has crept in to the output in :numref:`lst:shortlines1`. This can
be fixed using the YAML file in :numref:`lst:removeTWS-before` and running, for example,

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. index:: switches;-o demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m shortlines.tex -o shortlines1-tws.tex -l remove-para1.yaml,removeTWS-before.yaml  

in which case the output is as in :numref:`lst:shortlines1-tws`; notice that the double spaces
present in :numref:`lst:shortlines1` have been addressed.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/shortlines1-tws.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``shortlines1-tws.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:shortlines1-tws

Keeping with the settings in :numref:`lst:remove-para1-yaml`, we note that the ``all`` switch
applies to *all* code block types. So, for example, let’s consider the files in
:numref:`lst:shortlines-mand` and :numref:`lst:shortlines-opt`

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/shortlines-mand.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``shortlines-mand.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:shortlines-mand

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/shortlines-opt.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``shortlines-opt.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:shortlines-opt

Upon running the commands

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. index:: switches;-o demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m shortlines-mand.tex -o shortlines-mand1.tex -l remove-para1.yaml
    latexindent.pl -m shortlines-opt.tex -o shortlines-opt1.tex -l remove-para1.yaml

then we obtain the respective output given in :numref:`lst:shortlines-mand1` and
:numref:`lst:shortlines-opt1`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/shortlines-mand1.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``shortlines-mand1.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:shortlines-mand1

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/shortlines-opt1.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``shortlines-opt1.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:shortlines-opt1

Assuming that we turn *off* the ``all`` switch (by setting it to ``0``), then we can control the
behaviour of ``removeParagraphLineBreaks`` either on a per-code-block-type basis, or on a per-name
basis.

For example, let’s use the code in :numref:`lst:shortlines-envs`, and consider the settings in
:numref:`lst:remove-para2-yaml` and :numref:`lst:remove-para3-yaml`; note that in
:numref:`lst:remove-para2-yaml` we specify that *every* environment should receive treatment from
the routine, while in :numref:`lst:remove-para3-yaml` we specify that *only* the ``one``
environment should receive the treatment.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/shortlines-envs.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``shortlines-envs.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:shortlines-envs

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/remove-para2.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``remove-para2.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:remove-para2-yaml

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/remove-para3.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``remove-para3.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:remove-para3-yaml

Upon running the commands

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. index:: switches;-o demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m shortlines-envs.tex -o shortlines-envs2.tex -l remove-para2.yaml
    latexindent.pl -m shortlines-envs.tex -o shortlines-envs3.tex -l remove-para3.yaml

then we obtain the respective output given in :numref:`lst:shortlines-envs2` and
:numref:`lst:shortlines-envs3`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/shortlines-envs2.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``shortlines-envs2.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:shortlines-envs2

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/shortlines-envs3.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``shortlines-envs3.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:shortlines-envs3

The remaining code-block types can be customised in analogous ways, although note that ``commands``,
``keyEqualsValuesBracesBrackets``, ``namedGroupingBracesBrackets``,
``UnNamedGroupingBracesBrackets`` are controlled by the ``optionalArguments`` and the
``mandatoryArguments``.

The only special case is the ``masterDocument`` field; this is designed for ‘chapter’-type files
that may contain paragraphs that are not within any other code-blocks. For example, consider the
file in :numref:`lst:shortlines-md`, with the YAML settings in :numref:`lst:remove-para4-yaml`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/shortlines-md.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``shortlines-md.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:shortlines-md

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/remove-para4.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``remove-para4.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:remove-para4-yaml

Upon running the following command

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. index:: switches;-o demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m shortlines-md.tex -o shortlines-md4.tex -l remove-para4.yaml

then we obtain the output in :numref:`lst:shortlines-md4`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/shortlines-md4.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``shortlines-md4.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:shortlines-md4

Note that the ``all`` field can take the same exceptions detailed in
:numref:`lst:textwrap6-yaml`\ lst:textwrap8-yaml.

.. describe:: paragraphsStopAt:fields

The paragraph line break routine considers blank lines and the ``\par`` command to be the end of a
paragraph; you can fine tune the behaviour of the routine further by using the ``paragraphsStopAt``
fields, shown in :numref:`lst:paragraphsStopAt`.

.. index:: specialBeginEnd;paragraphsStopAt

.. index:: verbatim;in relation to paragraphsStopAt

.. literalinclude:: ../defaultSettings.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``paragraphsStopAt`` 
 	:name: lst:paragraphsStopAt
 	:lines: 531-540
 	:linenos:
 	:lineno-start: 531

The fields specified in ``paragraphsStopAt`` tell ``latexindent.pl`` to stop the current paragraph
when it reaches a line that *begins* with any of the code-block types specified as ``1`` in
:numref:`lst:paragraphsStopAt`. By default, you’ll see that the paragraph line break routine will
stop when it reaches an environment or verbatim code block at the beginning of a line. It is *not*
possible to specify these fields on a per-name basis.

Let’s use the ``.tex`` file in :numref:`lst:sl-stop`; we will, in turn, consider the settings in
:numref:`lst:stop-command-yaml` and :numref:`lst:stop-comment-yaml`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/sl-stop.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``sl-stop.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:sl-stop

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/stop-command.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``stop-command.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:stop-command-yaml

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/stop-comment.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``stop-comment.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:stop-comment-yaml

Upon using the settings from :numref:`lst:remove-para4-yaml` and running the commands

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. index:: switches;-o demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m sl-stop.tex -o sl-stop4.tex -l remove-para4.yaml
    latexindent.pl -m sl-stop.tex -o sl-stop4-command.tex -l=remove-para4.yaml,stop-command.yaml
    latexindent.pl -m sl-stop.tex -o sl-stop4-comment.tex -l=remove-para4.yaml,stop-comment.yaml

we obtain the respective outputs in :numref:`lst:sl-stop4` – :numref:`lst:sl-stop4-comment`;
notice in particular that:

-  in :numref:`lst:sl-stop4` the paragraph line break routine has included commands and comments;

-  in :numref:`lst:sl-stop4-command` the paragraph line break routine has *stopped* at the
   ``emph`` command, because in :numref:`lst:stop-command-yaml` we have specified ``commands`` to
   be ``1``, and ``emph`` is at the beginning of a line;

-  in :numref:`lst:sl-stop4-comment` the paragraph line break routine has *stopped* at the
   comments, because in :numref:`lst:stop-comment-yaml` we have specified ``comments`` to be
   ``1``, and the comment is at the beginning of a line.

In all outputs in :numref:`lst:sl-stop4` – :numref:`lst:sl-stop4-comment` we notice that the
paragraph line break routine has stopped at ``\begin{myenv}`` because, by default, ``environments``
is set to ``1`` in :numref:`lst:paragraphsStopAt`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/sl-stop4.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``sl-stop4.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:sl-stop4

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/sl-stop4-command.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``sl-stop4-command.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:sl-stop4-command

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/sl-stop4-comment.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``sl-stop4-comment.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:sl-stop4-comment

.. label follows

.. _subsec:removeparagraphlinebreaks:and:textwrap:

Combining removeParagraphLineBreaks and textWrapOptions
-------------------------------------------------------

The text wrapping routine (:numref:`subsec:textwrapping`) and remove paragraph line breaks routine
(:numref:`subsec:removeparagraphlinebreaks`) can be combined.

We motivate this feature with the code given in :numref:`lst:textwrap7`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap7.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``textwrap7.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap7

Applying the text wrap routine from :numref:`subsec:textwrapping` with, for example,
:numref:`lst:textwrap3-yaml` gives the output in :numref:`lst:textwrap7-mod3`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap7-mod3.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``textwrap7.tex`` using :numref:`lst:textwrap3-yaml` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap7-mod3

The text wrapping routine has behaved as expected, but it may be desired to remove paragraph line
breaks *before* performing the text wrapping routine. The desired behaviour can be achieved by
employing the ``beforeTextWrap`` switch.

Explicitly, using the settings in :numref:`lst:textwrap12-yaml` and running the command

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. index:: switches;-o demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m textwrap7.tex -l=textwrap12.yaml -o=+-mod12

we obtain the output in :numref:`lst:textwrap7-mod12`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap7-mod12.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``textwrap7-mod12.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap7-mod12

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/textwrap12.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``textwrap12.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:textwrap12-yaml

In :numref:`lst:textwrap7-mod12` the paragraph line breaks have first been removed from
:numref:`lst:textwrap7`, and then the text wrapping routine has been applied. It is envisaged that
variants of :numref:`lst:textwrap12-yaml` will be among the most useful settings for these two
features.

.. label follows

.. _sec:poly-switches:

Poly-switches
-------------

Every other field in the ``modifyLineBreaks`` field uses poly-switches, and can take one of the
following integer values:

.. index:: modifying linebreaks; using poly-switches

.. index:: poly-switches;definition

.. index:: poly-switches;values

.. index:: poly-switches;off by default: set to 0

:math:`-1`
    *remove mode*: line breaks before or after the *<part of thing>* can be removed (assuming that
    ``preserveBlankLines`` is set to ``0``);

0
    *off mode*: line breaks will not be modified for the *<part of thing>* under consideration;

1
    *add mode*: a line break will be added before or after the *<part of thing>* under
    consideration, assuming that there is not already a line break before or after the *<part of
    thing>*;

2
    *comment then add mode*: a comment symbol will be added, followed by a line break before or
    after the *<part of thing>* under consideration, assuming that there is not already a comment
    and line break before or after the *<part of thing>*;

3
    *add then blank line mode* : a line break will be added before or after the *<part of thing>*
    under consideration, assuming that there is not already a line break before or after the *<part
    of thing>*, followed by a blank line;

4
    *add blank line mode* ; a blank line will be added before or after the *<part of thing>* under
    consideration, even if the *<part of thing>* is already on its own line.

In the above, *<part of thing>* refers to either the *begin statement*, *body* or *end statement* of
the code blocks detailed in :numref:`tab:code-blocks`. All poly-switches are *off* by default;
``latexindent.pl`` searches first of all for per-name settings, and then followed by global
per-thing settings.

.. label follows

.. _sec:modifylinebreaks-environments:

modifyLineBreaks for environments
---------------------------------

We start by viewing a snippet of ``defaultSettings.yaml`` in :numref:`lst:environments-mlb`; note
that it contains *global* settings (immediately after the ``environments`` field) and that
*per-name* settings are also allowed – in the case of :numref:`lst:environments-mlb`, settings for
``equation*`` have been specified for demonstration. Note that all poly-switches are *off* (set to
0) by default.

.. index:: poly-switches;default values

.. index:: poly-switches;environment global example

.. index:: poly-switches;environment per-code block example

.. literalinclude:: ../defaultSettings.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``environments`` 
 	:name: lst:environments-mlb
 	:lines: 541-550
 	:linenos:
 	:lineno-start: 541

Let’s begin with the simple example given in :numref:`lst:env-mlb1-tex`; note that we have
annotated key parts of the file using ♠, ♥, ◆ and ♣, these will be related to fields specified in
:numref:`lst:environments-mlb`.

.. index:: poly-switches;visualisation: ♠, ♥, ◆, ♣

.. code-block:: latex
   :caption: ``env-mlb1.tex`` 
   :name: lst:env-mlb1-tex

    before words♠ \begin{myenv}♥body of myenv◆\end{myenv}♣ after words

Adding line breaks: BeginStartsOnOwnLine and BodyStartsOnOwnLine
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Let’s explore ``BeginStartsOnOwnLine`` and ``BodyStartsOnOwnLine`` in :numref:`lst:env-mlb1` and
:numref:`lst:env-mlb2`, and in particular, let’s allow each of them in turn to take a value of
:math:`1`.

.. index:: poly-switches;adding line breaks: set to 1

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb1.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``env-mlb1.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb1

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb2.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``env-mlb2.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb2

After running the following commands,

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m env-mlb.tex -l env-mlb1.yaml
    latexindent.pl -m env-mlb.tex -l env-mlb2.yaml

the output is as in :numref:`lst:env-mlb-mod1` and :numref:`lst:env-mlb-mod2` respectively.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb-mod1.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb.tex`` using :numref:`lst:env-mlb1` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb-mod1

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb-mod2.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb.tex`` using :numref:`lst:env-mlb2` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb-mod2

There are a couple of points to note:

-  in :numref:`lst:env-mlb-mod1` a line break has been added at the point denoted by ♠ in
   :numref:`lst:env-mlb1-tex`; no other line breaks have been changed;

-  in :numref:`lst:env-mlb-mod2` a line break has been added at the point denoted by ♥ in
   :numref:`lst:env-mlb1-tex`; furthermore, note that the *body* of ``myenv`` has received the
   appropriate (default) indentation.

Let’s now change each of the ``1`` values in :numref:`lst:env-mlb1` and :numref:`lst:env-mlb2`
so that they are :math:`2` and save them into ``env-mlb3.yaml`` and ``env-mlb4.yaml`` respectively
(see :numref:`lst:env-mlb3` and :numref:`lst:env-mlb4`).

.. index:: poly-switches;adding comments and then line breaks: set to 2

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb3.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``env-mlb3.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb3

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb4.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``env-mlb4.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb4

Upon running commands analogous to the above, we obtain :numref:`lst:env-mlb-mod3` and
:numref:`lst:env-mlb-mod4`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb-mod3.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb.tex`` using :numref:`lst:env-mlb3` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb-mod3

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb-mod4.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb.tex`` using :numref:`lst:env-mlb4` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb-mod4

Note that line breaks have been added as in :numref:`lst:env-mlb-mod1` and
:numref:`lst:env-mlb-mod2`, but this time a comment symbol has been added before adding the line
break; in both cases, trailing horizontal space has been stripped before doing so.

Let’s now change each of the ``1`` values in :numref:`lst:env-mlb1` and :numref:`lst:env-mlb2`
so that they are :math:`3` and save them into ``env-mlb5.yaml`` and ``env-mlb6.yaml`` respectively
(see :numref:`lst:env-mlb5` and :numref:`lst:env-mlb6`).

.. index:: poly-switches;adding blank lines: set to 3

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb5.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``env-mlb5.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb5

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb6.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``env-mlb6.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb6

Upon running commands analogous to the above, we obtain :numref:`lst:env-mlb-mod5` and
:numref:`lst:env-mlb-mod6`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb-mod5.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb.tex`` using :numref:`lst:env-mlb5` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb-mod5

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb-mod6.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb.tex`` using :numref:`lst:env-mlb6` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb-mod6

Note that line breaks have been added as in :numref:`lst:env-mlb-mod1` and
:numref:`lst:env-mlb-mod2`, but this time a *blank line* has been added after adding the line
break.

Let’s now change each of the ``1`` values in :numref:`lst:env-mlb5` and :numref:`lst:env-mlb6`
so that they are :math:`4` and save them into ``env-beg4.yaml`` and ``env-body4.yaml`` respectively
(see :numref:`lst:env-beg4` and :numref:`lst:env-body4`).

.. index:: poly-switches;adding blank lines (again"!): set to 4

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-beg4.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``env-beg4.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:env-beg4

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-body4.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``env-body4.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:env-body4

We will demonstrate this poly-switch value using the code in :numref:`lst:env-mlb1-text`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb1.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb1.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb1-text

Upon running the commands

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m env-mlb1.tex -l env-beg4.yaml
    latexindent.pl -m env-mlb.1tex -l env-body4.yaml

then we receive the respective outputs in :numref:`lst:env-mlb1-beg4` and
:numref:`lst:env-mlb1-body4`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb1-beg4.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb1.tex`` using :numref:`lst:env-beg4` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb1-beg4

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb1-body4.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb1.tex`` using :numref:`lst:env-body4` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb1-body4

We note in particular that, by design, for this value of the poly-switches:

#. in :numref:`lst:env-mlb1-beg4` a blank line has been inserted before the ``\begin`` statement,
   even though the ``\begin`` statement was already on its own line;

#. in :numref:`lst:env-mlb1-body4` a blank line has been inserted before the beginning of the
   *body*, even though it already began on its own line.

Adding line breaks using EndStartsOnOwnLine and EndFinishesWithLineBreak
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Let’s explore ``EndStartsOnOwnLine`` and ``EndFinishesWithLineBreak`` in :numref:`lst:env-mlb7`
and :numref:`lst:env-mlb8`, and in particular, let’s allow each of them in turn to take a value of
:math:`1`.

.. index:: poly-switches;adding line breaks: set to 1

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb7.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``env-mlb7.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb7

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb8.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``env-mlb8.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb8

After running the following commands,

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m env-mlb.tex -l env-mlb7.yaml
    latexindent.pl -m env-mlb.tex -l env-mlb8.yaml

the output is as in :numref:`lst:env-mlb-mod7` and :numref:`lst:env-mlb-mod8`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb-mod7.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb.tex`` using :numref:`lst:env-mlb7` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb-mod7

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb-mod8.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb.tex`` using :numref:`lst:env-mlb8` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb-mod8

There are a couple of points to note:

-  in :numref:`lst:env-mlb-mod7` a line break has been added at the point denoted by ◆ in
   :numref:`lst:env-mlb1-tex`; no other line breaks have been changed and the ``\end{myenv}``
   statement has *not* received indentation (as intended);

-  in :numref:`lst:env-mlb-mod8` a line break has been added at the point denoted by ♣ in
   :numref:`lst:env-mlb1-tex`.

Let’s now change each of the ``1`` values in :numref:`lst:env-mlb7` and :numref:`lst:env-mlb8`
so that they are :math:`2` and save them into ``env-mlb9.yaml`` and ``env-mlb10.yaml`` respectively
(see :numref:`lst:env-mlb9` and :numref:`lst:env-mlb10`).

.. index:: poly-switches;adding comments and then line breaks: set to 2

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb9.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``env-mlb9.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb9

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb10.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``env-mlb10.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb10

Upon running commands analogous to the above, we obtain :numref:`lst:env-mlb-mod9` and
:numref:`lst:env-mlb-mod10`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb-mod9.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb.tex`` using :numref:`lst:env-mlb9` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb-mod9

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb-mod10.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb.tex`` using :numref:`lst:env-mlb10` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb-mod10

Note that line breaks have been added as in :numref:`lst:env-mlb-mod7` and
:numref:`lst:env-mlb-mod8`, but this time a comment symbol has been added before adding the line
break; in both cases, trailing horizontal space has been stripped before doing so.

Let’s now change each of the ``1`` values in :numref:`lst:env-mlb7` and :numref:`lst:env-mlb8`
so that they are :math:`3` and save them into ``env-mlb11.yaml`` and ``env-mlb12.yaml`` respectively
(see :numref:`lst:env-mlb11` and :numref:`lst:env-mlb12`).

.. index:: poly-switches;adding blank lines: set to 3

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb11.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``env-mlb11.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb11

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb12.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``env-mlb12.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb12

Upon running commands analogous to the above, we obtain :numref:`lst:env-mlb-mod11` and
:numref:`lst:env-mlb-mod12`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb-mod11.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb.tex`` using :numref:`lst:env-mlb11` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb-mod11

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb-mod12.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb.tex`` using :numref:`lst:env-mlb12` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb-mod12

Note that line breaks have been added as in :numref:`lst:env-mlb-mod7` and
:numref:`lst:env-mlb-mod8`, and that a *blank line* has been added after the line break.

Let’s now change each of the ``1`` values in :numref:`lst:env-mlb11` and :numref:`lst:env-mlb12`
so that they are :math:`4` and save them into ``env-end4.yaml`` and ``env-end-f4.yaml`` respectively
(see :numref:`lst:env-end4` and :numref:`lst:env-end-f4`).

.. index:: poly-switches;adding blank lines (again"!): set to 4

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-end4.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``env-end4.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:env-end4

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-end-f4.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``env-end-f4.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:env-end-f4

We will demonstrate this poly-switch value using the code from :numref:`lst:env-mlb1-text`.

Upon running the commands

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m env-mlb1.tex -l env-end4.yaml
    latexindent.pl -m env-mlb.1tex -l env-end-f4.yaml

then we receive the respective outputs in :numref:`lst:env-mlb1-end4` and
:numref:`lst:env-mlb1-end-f4`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb1-end4.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb1.tex`` using :numref:`lst:env-end4` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb1-end4

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb1-end-f4.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb1.tex`` using :numref:`lst:env-end-f4` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb1-end-f4

We note in particular that, by design, for this value of the poly-switches:

#. in :numref:`lst:env-mlb1-end4` a blank line has been inserted before the ``\end`` statement,
   even though the ``\end`` statement was already on its own line;

#. in :numref:`lst:env-mlb1-end-f4` a blank line has been inserted after the ``\end`` statement,
   even though it already began on its own line.

poly-switches 1, 2, and 3 only add line breaks when necessary
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you ask ``latexindent.pl`` to add a line break (possibly with a comment) using a poly-switch
value of :math:`1` (or :math:`2` or :math:`3`), it will only do so if necessary. For example, if you
process the file in :numref:`lst:mlb2` using poly-switch values of 1, 2, or 3, it will be left
unchanged.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb2.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb2.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:mlb2

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb3.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb3.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:mlb3

Setting the poly-switches to a value of :math:`4` instructs ``latexindent.pl`` to add a line break
even if the *<part of thing>* is already on its own line; see :numref:`lst:env-mlb1-beg4` and
:numref:`lst:env-mlb1-body4` and :numref:`lst:env-mlb1-end4` and
:numref:`lst:env-mlb1-end-f4`.

In contrast, the output from processing the file in :numref:`lst:mlb3` will vary depending on the
poly-switches used; in :numref:`lst:env-mlb3-mod2` you’ll see that the comment symbol after the
``\begin{myenv}`` has been moved to the next line, as ``BodyStartsOnOwnLine`` is set to ``1``. In
:numref:`lst:env-mlb3-mod4` you’ll see that the comment has been accounted for correctly because
``BodyStartsOnOwnLine`` has been set to ``2``, and the comment symbol has *not* been moved to its
own line. You’re encouraged to experiment with :numref:`lst:mlb3` and by setting the other
poly-switches considered so far to ``2`` in turn.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb3-mod2.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb3.tex`` using :numref:`lst:env-mlb2` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb3-mod2

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb3-mod4.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb3.tex`` using :numref:`lst:env-mlb4` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb3-mod4

The details of the discussion in this section have concerned *global* poly-switches in the
``environments`` field; each switch can also be specified on a *per-name* basis, which would take
priority over the global values; with reference to :numref:`lst:environments-mlb`, an example is
shown for the ``equation*`` environment.

Removing line breaks (poly-switches set to :math:`-1`)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Setting poly-switches to :math:`-1` tells ``latexindent.pl`` to remove line breaks of the *<part of
the thing>*, if necessary. We will consider the example code given in :numref:`lst:mlb4`, noting
in particular the positions of the line break highlighters, ♠, ♥, ◆ and ♣, together with the
associated YAML files in :numref:`lst:env-mlb13` – :numref:`lst:env-mlb16`.

.. index:: poly-switches;removing line breaks: set to -1

.. code-block:: latex
   :caption: ``env-mlb4.tex`` 
   :name: lst:mlb4

    before words♠
    \begin{myenv}♥
    body of myenv◆
    \end{myenv}♣
    after words

After

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb13.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``env-mlb13.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb13

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb14.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``env-mlb14.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb14

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb15.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``env-mlb15.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb15

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb16.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``env-mlb16.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb16

running the commands

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m env-mlb4.tex -l env-mlb13.yaml
    latexindent.pl -m env-mlb4.tex -l env-mlb14.yaml
    latexindent.pl -m env-mlb4.tex -l env-mlb15.yaml
    latexindent.pl -m env-mlb4.tex -l env-mlb16.yaml

we obtain the respective output in :numref:`lst:env-mlb4-mod13` – :numref:`lst:env-mlb4-mod16`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb4-mod13.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb4.tex`` using :numref:`lst:env-mlb13` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb4-mod13

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb4-mod14.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb4.tex`` using :numref:`lst:env-mlb14` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb4-mod14

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb4-mod15.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb4.tex`` using :numref:`lst:env-mlb15` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb4-mod15

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb4-mod16.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb4.tex`` using :numref:`lst:env-mlb16` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb4-mod16

Notice that in:

-  :numref:`lst:env-mlb4-mod13` the line break denoted by ♠ in :numref:`lst:mlb4` has been
   removed;

-  :numref:`lst:env-mlb4-mod14` the line break denoted by ♥ in :numref:`lst:mlb4` has been
   removed;

-  :numref:`lst:env-mlb4-mod15` the line break denoted by ◆ in :numref:`lst:mlb4` has been
   removed;

-  :numref:`lst:env-mlb4-mod16` the line break denoted by ♣ in :numref:`lst:mlb4` has been
   removed.

We examined each of these cases separately for clarity of explanation, but you can combine all of
the YAML settings in :numref:`lst:env-mlb13` – :numref:`lst:env-mlb16` into one file;
alternatively, you could tell ``latexindent.pl`` to load them all by using the following command,
for example

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m env-mlb4.tex -l env-mlb13.yaml,env-mlb14.yaml,env-mlb15.yaml,env-mlb16.yaml

which gives the output in :numref:`lst:env-mlb1-tex`.

About trailing horizontal space
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Recall that on :ref:`page yaml:removeTrailingWhitespace <yaml:removeTrailingWhitespace>` we
discussed the YAML field ``removeTrailingWhitespace``, and that it has two (binary) switches to
determine if horizontal space should be removed ``beforeProcessing`` and ``afterProcessing``. The
``beforeProcessing`` is particularly relevant when considering the ``-m`` switch; let’s consider the
file shown in :numref:`lst:mlb5`, which highlights trailing spaces.

.. code-block:: latex
   :caption: ``env-mlb5.tex`` 
   :name: lst:mlb5

    before words   ♠ 
    \begin{myenv}           ♥
    body of myenv      ◆ 
    \end{myenv}     ♣
    after words

The

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/removeTWS-before.yaml
 	:class: .baseyaml
 	:caption: ``removeTWS-before.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:removeTWS-before

output from the following commands

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m env-mlb5.tex -l env-mlb13.yaml,env-mlb14.yaml,env-mlb15.yaml,env-mlb16.yaml
    latexindent.pl -m env-mlb5.tex -l env-mlb13.yaml,env-mlb14.yaml,env-mlb15.yaml,env-mlb16.yaml,removeTWS-before.yaml

is shown, respectively, in :numref:`lst:env-mlb5-modAll` and
:numref:`lst:env-mlb5-modAll-remove-WS`; note that the trailing horizontal white space has been
preserved (by default) in :numref:`lst:env-mlb5-modAll`, while in
:numref:`lst:env-mlb5-modAll-remove-WS`, it has been removed using the switch specified in
:numref:`lst:removeTWS-before`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb5-modAll.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb5.tex`` using :numref:`lst:env-mlb4-mod13` – :numref:`lst:env-mlb4-mod16` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb5-modAll

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb5-modAll-remove-WS.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb5.tex`` using :numref:`lst:env-mlb4-mod13` – :numref:`lst:env-mlb4-mod16` *and* :numref:`lst:removeTWS-before` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb5-modAll-remove-WS

poly-switch line break removal and blank lines
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now let’s consider the file in :numref:`lst:mlb6`, which contains blank lines.

.. index:: poly-switches;blank lines

.. code-block:: latex
   :caption: ``env-mlb6.tex`` 
   :name: lst:mlb6

    before words♠


    \begin{myenv}♥


    body of myenv◆


    \end{myenv}♣

    after words

Upon

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/UnpreserveBlankLines.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``UnpreserveBlankLines.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:UnpreserveBlankLines

running the following commands

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m env-mlb6.tex -l env-mlb13.yaml,env-mlb14.yaml,env-mlb15.yaml,env-mlb16.yaml
    latexindent.pl -m env-mlb6.tex -l env-mlb13.yaml,env-mlb14.yaml,env-mlb15.yaml,env-mlb16.yaml,UnpreserveBlankLines.yaml

we receive the respective outputs in :numref:`lst:env-mlb6-modAll` and
:numref:`lst:env-mlb6-modAll-un-Preserve-Blank-Lines`. In :numref:`lst:env-mlb6-modAll` we see
that the multiple blank lines have each been condensed into one blank line, but that blank lines
have *not* been removed by the poly-switches – this is because, by default, ``preserveBlankLines``
is set to ``1``. By contrast, in :numref:`lst:env-mlb6-modAll-un-Preserve-Blank-Lines`, we have
allowed the poly-switches to remove blank lines because, in :numref:`lst:UnpreserveBlankLines`, we
have set ``preserveBlankLines`` to ``0``.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb6-modAll.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb6.tex`` using :numref:`lst:env-mlb4-mod13` – :numref:`lst:env-mlb4-mod16` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb6-modAll

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb6-modAll-un-Preserve-Blank-Lines.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb6.tex`` using :numref:`lst:env-mlb4-mod13` – :numref:`lst:env-mlb4-mod16` *and* :numref:`lst:UnpreserveBlankLines` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb6-modAll-un-Preserve-Blank-Lines

We can explore this further using the blank-line poly-switch value of :math:`3`; let’s use the file
given in :numref:`lst:env-mlb7-tex`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb7.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb7.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb7-tex

Upon running the following commands

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m env-mlb7.tex -l env-mlb12.yaml,env-mlb13.yaml
    latexindent.pl -m env-mlb7.tex -l env-mlb13.yaml,env-mlb14.yaml,UnpreserveBlankLines.yaml

we receive the outputs given in :numref:`lst:env-mlb7-preserve` and
:numref:`lst:env-mlb7-no-preserve`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb7-preserve.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb7-preserve.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb7-preserve

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/env-mlb7-no-preserve.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``env-mlb7-no-preserve.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:env-mlb7-no-preserve

Notice that in:

-  :numref:`lst:env-mlb7-preserve` that ``\end{one}`` has added a blank line, because of the value
   of ``EndFinishesWithLineBreak`` in :numref:`lst:env-mlb12`, and even though the line break
   ahead of ``\begin{two}`` should have been removed (because of ``BeginStartsOnOwnLine`` in
   :numref:`lst:env-mlb13`), the blank line has been preserved by default;

-  :numref:`lst:env-mlb7-no-preserve`, by contrast, has had the additional line-break removed,
   because of the settings in :numref:`lst:UnpreserveBlankLines`.

.. label follows

.. _subsec:dbs:

Poly-switches for double back slash
-----------------------------------

With reference to ``lookForAlignDelims`` (see :numref:`lst:aligndelims:basic`) you can specify
poly-switches to dictate the line-break behaviour of double back slashes in environments
(:numref:`lst:tabularafter:basic`), commands (:numref:`lst:matrixafter`), or special code blocks
(:numref:`lst:specialafter`). Note that for these poly-switches to take effect, the name of the
code block must necessarily be specified within ``lookForAlignDelims``
(:numref:`lst:aligndelims:basic`); we will demonstrate this in what follows.

.. index:: delimiters;poly-switches for double back slash

.. index:: modifying linebreaks; surrounding double back slash

.. index:: poly-switches;for double back slash (delimiters)

Consider the code given in :numref:`lst:dbs-demo`.

.. code-block:: latex
   :caption: ``tabular3.tex`` 
   :name: lst:dbs-demo

    \begin{tabular}{cc}
     1 & 2 ★\\□ 3 & 4 ★\\□
    \end{tabular}

Referencing :numref:`lst:dbs-demo`:

-  ``DBS`` stands for *double back slash*;

-  line breaks ahead of the double back slash are annotated by ★, and are controlled by
   ``DBSStartsOnOwnLine``;

-  line breaks after the double back slash are annotated by □, and are controlled by
   ``DBSFinishesWithLineBreak``.

Let’s explore each of these in turn.

Double back slash starts on own line
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We explore ``DBSStartsOnOwnLine`` (★ in :numref:`lst:dbs-demo`); starting with the code in
:numref:`lst:dbs-demo`, together with the YAML files given in :numref:`lst:DBS1` and
:numref:`lst:DBS2` and running the following commands

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m tabular3.tex -l DBS1.yaml
    latexindent.pl -m tabular3.tex -l DBS2.yaml

then we receive the respective output given in :numref:`lst:tabular3-DBS1` and
:numref:`lst:tabular3-DBS2`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/tabular3-mod1.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``tabular3.tex`` using :numref:`lst:DBS1` 
 	:name: lst:tabular3-DBS1

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/DBS1.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``DBS1.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:DBS1

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/tabular3-mod2.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``tabular3.tex`` using :numref:`lst:DBS2` 
 	:name: lst:tabular3-DBS2

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/DBS2.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``DBS2.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:DBS2

We note that

-  :numref:`lst:DBS1` specifies ``DBSStartsOnOwnLine`` for *every* environment (that is within
   ``lookForAlignDelims``, :numref:`lst:aligndelims:advanced`); the double back slashes from
   :numref:`lst:dbs-demo` have been moved to their own line in :numref:`lst:tabular3-DBS1`;

-  :numref:`lst:DBS2` specifies ``DBSStartsOnOwnLine`` on a *per-name* basis for ``tabular`` (that
   is within ``lookForAlignDelims``, :numref:`lst:aligndelims:advanced`); the double back slashes
   from :numref:`lst:dbs-demo` have been moved to their own line in :numref:`lst:tabular3-DBS2`,
   having added comment symbols before moving them.

Double back slash finishes with line break
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Let’s now explore ``DBSFinishesWithLineBreak`` (□ in :numref:`lst:dbs-demo`); starting with the
code in :numref:`lst:dbs-demo`, together with the YAML files given in :numref:`lst:DBS3` and
:numref:`lst:DBS4` and running the following commands

.. index:: poly-switches;for double back slash (delimiters)

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m tabular3.tex -l DBS3.yaml
    latexindent.pl -m tabular3.tex -l DBS4.yaml

then we receive the respective output given in :numref:`lst:tabular3-DBS3` and
:numref:`lst:tabular3-DBS4`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/tabular3-mod3.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``tabular3.tex`` using :numref:`lst:DBS3` 
 	:name: lst:tabular3-DBS3

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/DBS3.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``DBS3.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:DBS3

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/tabular3-mod4.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``tabular3.tex`` using :numref:`lst:DBS4` 
 	:name: lst:tabular3-DBS4

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/DBS4.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``DBS4.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:DBS4

We note that

-  :numref:`lst:DBS3` specifies ``DBSFinishesWithLineBreak`` for *every* environment (that is
   within ``lookForAlignDelims``, :numref:`lst:aligndelims:advanced`); the code following the
   double back slashes from :numref:`lst:dbs-demo` has been moved to their own line in
   :numref:`lst:tabular3-DBS3`;

-  :numref:`lst:DBS4` specifies ``DBSFinishesWithLineBreak`` on a *per-name* basis for ``tabular``
   (that is within ``lookForAlignDelims``, :numref:`lst:aligndelims:advanced`); the first double
   back slashes from :numref:`lst:dbs-demo` have moved code following them to their own line in
   :numref:`lst:tabular3-DBS4`, having added comment symbols before moving them; the final double
   back slashes have *not* added a line break as they are at the end of the body within the code
   block.

Double back slash poly-switches for specialBeginEnd
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Let’s explore the double back slash poly-switches for code blocks within ``specialBeginEnd`` code
blocks (:numref:`lst:specialBeginEnd`); we begin with the code within :numref:`lst:special4`.

.. index:: specialBeginEnd;double backslash poly-switch demonstration

.. index:: poly-switches;double backslash

.. index:: poly-switches;for double back slash (delimiters)

.. index:: specialBeginEnd;lookForAlignDelims

.. index:: delimiters

.. index:: linebreaks;summary of poly-switches

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/special4.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``special4.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:special4

Upon using the YAML settings in :numref:`lst:DBS5`, and running the command

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m special4.tex -l DBS5.yaml

then we receive the output given in :numref:`lst:special4-DBS5`.

.. index:: delimiters;with specialBeginEnd and the -m switch

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/special4-mod5.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``special4.tex`` using :numref:`lst:DBS5` 
 	:name: lst:special4-DBS5

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/DBS5.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``DBS5.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:DBS5

There are a few things to note:

-  in :numref:`lst:DBS5` we have specified ``cmhMath`` within ``lookForAlignDelims``; without
   this, the double back slash poly-switches would be ignored for this code block;

-  the ``DBSFinishesWithLineBreak`` poly-switch has controlled the line breaks following the double
   back slashes;

-  the ``SpecialEndStartsOnOwnLine`` poly-switch has controlled the addition of a comment symbol,
   followed by a line break, as it is set to a value of 2.

Double back slash poly-switches for optional and mandatory arguments
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For clarity, we provide a demonstration of controlling the double back slash poly-switches for
optional and mandatory arguments. We begin with the code in :numref:`lst:mycommand2`.

.. index:: poly-switches;for double back slash (delimiters)

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/mycommand2.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``mycommand2.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:mycommand2

Upon using the YAML settings in :numref:`lst:DBS6` and :numref:`lst:DBS7`, and running the
command

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m mycommand2.tex -l DBS6.yaml
    latexindent.pl -m mycommand2.tex -l DBS7.yaml

then we receive the output given in :numref:`lst:mycommand2-DBS6` and
:numref:`lst:mycommand2-DBS7`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/mycommand2-mod6.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``mycommand2.tex`` using :numref:`lst:DBS6` 
 	:name: lst:mycommand2-DBS6

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/DBS6.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``DBS6.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:DBS6

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/mycommand2-mod7.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``mycommand2.tex`` using :numref:`lst:DBS7` 
 	:name: lst:mycommand2-DBS7

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/DBS7.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``DBS7.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:DBS7

Double back slash optional square brackets
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The pattern matching for the double back slash will also, optionally, allow trailing square brackets
that contain a measurement of vertical spacing, for example ``\\[3pt]``.

.. index:: poly-switches;for double back slash (delimiters)

For example, beginning with the code in :numref:`lst:pmatrix3`

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/pmatrix3.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``pmatrix3.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:pmatrix3

and running the following command, using :numref:`lst:DBS3`,

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m pmatrix3.tex -l DBS3.yaml

then we receive the output given in :numref:`lst:pmatrix3-DBS3`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/pmatrix3-mod3.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``pmatrix3.tex`` using :numref:`lst:DBS3` 
 	:name: lst:pmatrix3-DBS3

You can customise the pattern for the double back slash by exploring the *fine tuning* field
detailed in :numref:`lst:fineTuning`.

Poly-switches for other code blocks
-----------------------------------

Rather than repeat the examples shown for the environment code blocks (in
:numref:`sec:modifylinebreaks-environments`), we choose to detail the poly-switches for all other
code blocks in :numref:`tab:poly-switch-mapping`; note that each and every one of these
poly-switches is *off by default*, i.e, set to ``0``.

Note also that, by design, line breaks involving, ``filecontents`` and ‘comment-marked’ code blocks
(:numref:`lst:alignmentmarkup`) can *not* be modified using ``latexindent.pl``. However, there are
two poly-switches available for ``verbatim`` code blocks: environments
(:numref:`lst:verbatimEnvironments`), commands (:numref:`lst:verbatimCommands`) and
``specialBeginEnd`` (:numref:`lst:special-verb1-yaml`).

.. index:: specialBeginEnd;poly-switch summary

.. index:: verbatim;poly-switch summary

.. index:: poly-switches;summary of all poly-switches

.. label follows

.. _tab:poly-switch-mapping:

.. table::  Poly-switch mappings for all code-block types

	
	

	
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	| Code block                      | Sample                                   |     |                                      |
	+=================================+==========================================+=====+======================================+
	| environment                     | ``before words``\ ♠                      | ♠   | BeginStartsOnOwnLine                 |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | ``\begin{myenv}``\ ♥                     | ♥   | BodyStartsOnOwnLine                  |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | ``body of myenv``\ ◆                     | ◆   | EndStartsOnOwnLine                   |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | ``\end{myenv}``\ ♣                       | ♣   | EndFinishesWithLineBreak             |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | ``after words``                          |     |                                      |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	| ifelsefi                        | ``before words``\ ♠                      | ♠   | IfStartsOnOwnLine                    |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | ``\if...``\ ♥                            | ♥   | BodyStartsOnOwnLine                  |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | ``body of if/or statement``\ ▲           | ▲   | OrStartsOnOwnLine                    |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | ``\or``\ ▼                               | ▼   | OrFinishesWithLineBreak              |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | ``body of if/or statement``\ ★           | ★   | ElseStartsOnOwnLine                  |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | ``\else``\ □                             | □   | ElseFinishesWithLineBreak            |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | ``body of else statement``\ ◆            | ◆   | FiStartsOnOwnLine                    |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | ``\fi``\ ♣                               | ♣   | FiFinishesWithLineBreak              |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | ``after words``                          |     |                                      |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	| optionalArguments               | ``...``\ ♠                               | ♠   | LSqBStartsOnOwnLine [1]_             |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | ``[``\ ♥                                 | ♥   | OptArgBodyStartsOnOwnLine            |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | ``value before comma``\ ★,               | ★   | CommaStartsOnOwnLine                 |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | □                                        | □   | CommaFinishesWithLineBreak           |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | ``end of body of opt arg``\ ◆            | ◆   | RSqBStartsOnOwnLine                  |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | ``]``\ ♣                                 | ♣   | RSqBFinishesWithLineBreak            |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | ``...``                                  |     |                                      |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	| mandatoryArguments              | ``...``\ ♠                               | ♠   | LCuBStartsOnOwnLine [2]_             |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | ``{``\ ♥                                 | ♥   | MandArgBodyStartsOnOwnLine           |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | ``value before comma``\ ★,               | ★   | CommaStartsOnOwnLine                 |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | □                                        | □   | CommaFinishesWithLineBreak           |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | ``end of body of mand arg``\ ◆           | ◆   | RCuBStartsOnOwnLine                  |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | ``}``\ ♣                                 | ♣   | RCuBFinishesWithLineBreak            |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | ``...``                                  |     |                                      |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	| commands                        | ``before words``\ ♠                      | ♠   | CommandStartsOnOwnLine               |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | ``\mycommand``\ ♥                        | ♥   | CommandNameFinishesWithLineBreak     |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | <arguments>                              |     |                                      |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	| namedGroupingBraces Brackets    | before words♠                            | ♠   | NameStartsOnOwnLine                  |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | myname♥                                  | ♥   | NameFinishesWithLineBreak            |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | <braces/brackets>                        |     |                                      |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	| keyEqualsValuesBracesBrackets   | before words♠                            | ♠   | KeyStartsOnOwnLine                   |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | key●=♥                                   | ●   | EqualsStartsOnOwnLine                |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | <braces/brackets>                        | ♥   | EqualsFinishesWithLineBreak          |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	| items                           | before words♠                            | ♠   | ItemStartsOnOwnLine                  |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | ``\item``\ ♥                             | ♥   | ItemFinishesWithLineBreak            |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | ``...``                                  |     |                                      |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	| specialBeginEnd                 | before words♠                            | ♠   | SpecialBeginStartsOnOwnLine          |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | ``\[``\ ♥                                | ♥   | SpecialBodyStartsOnOwnLine           |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | ``body of special/middle``\ ★            | ★   | SpecialMiddleStartsOnOwnLine         |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | ``\middle``\ □                           | □   | SpecialMiddleFinishesWithLineBreak   |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | body of special/middle ◆                 | ◆   | SpecialEndStartsOnOwnLine            |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | ``\]``\ ♣                                | ♣   | SpecialEndFinishesWithLineBreak      |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | after words                              |     |                                      |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	| verbatim                        | before words♠\ ``\begin{verbatim}``      | ♠   | VerbatimBeginStartsOnOwnLine         |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | body of verbatim ``\end{verbatim}``\ ♣   | ♣   | VerbatimEndFinishesWithLineBreak     |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	|                                 | after words                              |     |                                      |
	+---------------------------------+------------------------------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
	


Partnering BodyStartsOnOwnLine with argument-based poly-switches
----------------------------------------------------------------

Some poly-switches need to be partnered together; in particular, when line breaks involving the
*first* argument of a code block need to be accounted for using both ``BodyStartsOnOwnLine`` (or its
equivalent, see :numref:`tab:poly-switch-mapping`) and ``LCuBStartsOnOwnLine`` for mandatory
arguments, and ``LSqBStartsOnOwnLine`` for optional arguments.

.. index:: poly-switches;conflicting partnering

Let’s begin with the code in :numref:`lst:mycommand1` and the YAML settings in
:numref:`lst:mycom-mlb1`; with reference to :numref:`tab:poly-switch-mapping`, the key
``CommandNameFinishesWithLineBreak`` is an alias for ``BodyStartsOnOwnLine``.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/mycommand1.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``mycommand1.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:mycommand1

Upon running the command

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m -l=mycom-mlb1.yaml mycommand1.tex

we obtain :numref:`lst:mycommand1-mlb1`; note that the *second* mandatory argument beginning brace
``{`` has had its leading line break removed, but that the *first* brace has not.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/mycommand1-mlb1.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``mycommand1.tex`` using :numref:`lst:mycom-mlb1` 
 	:name: lst:mycommand1-mlb1

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/mycom-mlb1.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``mycom-mlb1.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:mycom-mlb1

Now let’s change the YAML file so that it is as in :numref:`lst:mycom-mlb2`; upon running the
analogous command to that given above, we obtain :numref:`lst:mycommand1-mlb2`; both beginning
braces ``{`` have had their leading line breaks removed.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/mycommand1-mlb2.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``mycommand1.tex`` using :numref:`lst:mycom-mlb2` 
 	:name: lst:mycommand1-mlb2

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/mycom-mlb2.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``mycom-mlb2.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:mycom-mlb2

Now let’s change the YAML file so that it is as in :numref:`lst:mycom-mlb3`; upon running the
analogous command to that given above, we obtain :numref:`lst:mycommand1-mlb3`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/mycommand1-mlb3.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``mycommand1.tex`` using :numref:`lst:mycom-mlb3` 
 	:name: lst:mycommand1-mlb3

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/mycom-mlb3.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``mycom-mlb3.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:mycom-mlb3

Conflicting poly-switches: sequential code blocks
-------------------------------------------------

It is very easy to have conflicting poly-switches; if we use the example from
:numref:`lst:mycommand1`, and consider the YAML settings given in :numref:`lst:mycom-mlb4`. The
output from running

.. index:: poly-switches;conflicting switches

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m -l=mycom-mlb4.yaml mycommand1.tex

is given in :numref:`lst:mycom-mlb4`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/mycommand1-mlb4.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``mycommand1.tex`` using :numref:`lst:mycom-mlb4` 
 	:name: lst:mycommand1-mlb4

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/mycom-mlb4.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``mycom-mlb4.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:mycom-mlb4

Studying :numref:`lst:mycom-mlb4`, we see that the two poly-switches are at opposition with one
another:

-  on the one hand, ``LCuBStartsOnOwnLine`` should *not* start on its own line (as poly-switch is
   set to :math:`-1`);

-  on the other hand, ``RCuBFinishesWithLineBreak`` *should* finish with a line break.

So, which should win the conflict? As demonstrated in :numref:`lst:mycommand1-mlb4`, it is clear
that ``LCuBStartsOnOwnLine`` won this conflict, and the reason is that *the second argument was
processed after the first* – in general, the most recently-processed code block and associated
poly-switch takes priority.

We can explore this further by considering the YAML settings in :numref:`lst:mycom-mlb5`; upon
running the command

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m -l=mycom-mlb5.yaml mycommand1.tex

we obtain the output given in :numref:`lst:mycommand1-mlb5`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/mycommand1-mlb5.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``mycommand1.tex`` using :numref:`lst:mycom-mlb5` 
 	:name: lst:mycommand1-mlb5

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/mycom-mlb5.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``mycom-mlb5.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:mycom-mlb5

As previously, the most-recently-processed code block takes priority – as before, the second (i.e,
*last*) argument. Exploring this further, we consider the YAML settings in
:numref:`lst:mycom-mlb6`, which give associated output in :numref:`lst:mycommand1-mlb6`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/mycommand1-mlb6.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``mycommand1.tex`` using :numref:`lst:mycom-mlb6` 
 	:name: lst:mycommand1-mlb6

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/mycom-mlb6.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``mycom-mlb6.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:mycom-mlb6

Note that a ``%`` *has* been added to the trailing first ``}``; this is because:

-  while processing the *first* argument, the trailing line break has been removed
   (``RCuBFinishesWithLineBreak`` set to :math:`-1`);

-  while processing the *second* argument, ``latexindent.pl`` finds that it does *not* begin on its
   own line, and so because ``LCuBStartsOnOwnLine`` is set to :math:`2`, it adds a comment, followed
   by a line break.

Conflicting poly-switches: nested code blocks
---------------------------------------------

Now let’s consider an example when nested code blocks have conflicting poly-switches; we’ll use the
code in :numref:`lst:nested-env`, noting that it contains nested environments.

.. index:: poly-switches;conflicting switches

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/nested-env.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``nested-env.tex`` 
 	:name: lst:nested-env

Let’s use the YAML settings given in :numref:`lst:nested-env-mlb1-yaml`, which upon running the
command

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m -l=nested-env-mlb1.yaml nested-env.tex

gives the output in :numref:`lst:nested-env-mlb1`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/nested-env-mlb1.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``nested-env.tex`` using :numref:`lst:nested-env-mlb1-yaml` 
 	:name: lst:nested-env-mlb1

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/nested-env-mlb1.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``nested-env-mlb1.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:nested-env-mlb1-yaml

In :numref:`lst:nested-env-mlb1`, let’s first of all note that both environments have received the
appropriate (default) indentation; secondly, note that the poly-switch ``EndStartsOnOwnLine``
appears to have won the conflict, as ``\end{one}`` has had its leading line break removed.

To understand it, let’s talk about the three basic phases

.. label follows

.. _page:phases:

of ``latexindent.pl``:

#. Phase 1: packing, in which code blocks are replaced with unique ids, working from *the inside to
   the outside*, and then sequentially – for example, in :numref:`lst:nested-env`, the ``two``
   environment is found *before* the ``one`` environment; if the -m switch is active, then during
   this phase:

   -  line breaks at the beginning of the ``body`` can be added (if ``BodyStartsOnOwnLine`` is
      :math:`1` or :math:`2`) or removed (if ``BodyStartsOnOwnLine`` is :math:`-1`);

   -  line breaks at the end of the body can be added (if ``EndStartsOnOwnLine`` is :math:`1` or
      :math:`2`) or removed (if ``EndStartsOnOwnLine`` is :math:`-1`);

   -  line breaks after the end statement can be added (if ``EndFinishesWithLineBreak`` is :math:`1`
      or :math:`2`).

#. Phase 2: indentation, in which white space is added to the begin, body, and end statements;

#. Phase 3: unpacking, in which unique ids are replaced by their *indented* code blocks; if the -m
   switch is active, then during this phase,

   -  line breaks before ``begin`` statements can be added or removed (depending upon
      ``BeginStartsOnOwnLine``);

   -  line breaks after *end* statements can be removed but *NOT* added (see
      ``EndFinishesWithLineBreak``).

With reference to :numref:`lst:nested-env-mlb1`, this means that during Phase 1:

-  the ``two`` environment is found first, and the line break ahead of the ``\end{two}`` statement
   is removed because ``EndStartsOnOwnLine`` is set to :math:`-1`. Importantly, because, *at this
   stage*, ``\end{two}`` *does* finish with a line break, ``EndFinishesWithLineBreak`` causes no
   action.

-  next, the ``one`` environment is found; the line break ahead of ``\end{one}`` is removed because
   ``EndStartsOnOwnLine`` is set to :math:`-1`.

The indentation is done in Phase 2; in Phase 3 *there is no option to add a line break after the
``end`` statements*. We can justify this by remembering that during Phase 3, the ``one`` environment
will be found and processed first, followed by the ``two`` environment. If the ``two`` environment
were to add a line break after the ``\end{two}`` statement, then ``latexindent.pl`` would have no
way of knowing how much indentation to add to the subsequent text (in this case, ``\end{one}``).

We can explore this further using the poly-switches in :numref:`lst:nested-env-mlb2`; upon running
the command

.. index:: switches;-l demonstration

.. index:: switches;-m demonstration

.. code-block:: latex
   :class: .commandshell

    latexindent.pl -m -l=nested-env-mlb2.yaml nested-env.tex

we obtain the output given in :numref:`lst:nested-env-mlb2-output`.

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/nested-env-mlb2.tex
 	:class: .tex
 	:caption: ``nested-env.tex`` using :numref:`lst:nested-env-mlb2` 
 	:name: lst:nested-env-mlb2-output

.. literalinclude:: demonstrations/nested-env-mlb2.yaml
 	:class: .mlbyaml
 	:caption: ``nested-env-mlb2.yaml`` 
 	:name: lst:nested-env-mlb2

During Phase 1:

-  the ``two`` environment is found first, and the line break ahead of the ``\end{two}`` statement
   is not changed because ``EndStartsOnOwnLine`` is set to :math:`1`. Importantly, because, *at this
   stage*, ``\end{two}`` *does* finish with a line break, ``EndFinishesWithLineBreak`` causes no
   action.

-  next, the ``one`` environment is found; the line break ahead of ``\end{one}`` is already present,
   and no action is needed.

The indentation is done in Phase 2, and then in Phase 3, the ``one`` environment is found and
processed first, followed by the ``two`` environment. *At this stage*, the ``two`` environment finds
``EndFinishesWithLineBreak`` is :math:`-1`, so it removes the trailing line break; remember, at this
point, ``latexindent.pl`` has completely finished with the ``one`` environment.

.. raw:: html

   <div id="refs" class="references">

.. raw:: html

   <div id="ref-mlep">

mlep. 2017. “One Sentence Per Line.” August 16.
https://github.com/cmhughes/latexindent.pl/issues/81.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div id="ref-jowens">

Owens, John. 2017. “Paragraph Line Break Routine Removal.” May 27.
https://github.com/cmhughes/latexindent.pl/issues/33.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div id="ref-textwrap">

“Text::Wrap Perl Module.” 2017. Accessed May 1. http://perldoc.perl.org/Text/Wrap.html.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div id="ref-zoehneto">

(zoehneto), Tom Zöhner. 2018. “Improving Text Wrap.” February 4.
https://github.com/cmhughes/latexindent.pl/issues/103.

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. [1]
   LSqB stands for Left Square Bracket

.. [2]
   LCuB stands for Left Curly Brace
